# Rohlfs_Lab

This repository contains scripts I have created while working in the Rohlfs lab. Our goal in this project is to investigate the broad role of TRs across the genome in adaptive archaic introgression. I am continuing to work at this lab until graduation, so this repository is continuously being updated!

## Abstract For Project:
Tandem repeats (TRs) are highly variable DNA elements characterized by consecutive motif repetitions and are known to influence gene expression and protein structure. Their high mutation rates make them compelling yet unexplored sources of adaptive variation in human evolution. An evolutionary process that can be studied is adaptive introgression, defined as the transfer of favorable alleles aiding adaptation, which can be studied using archaic tracts. These regions of the genome inherited from archaic humans sometimes carry segments of adaptive alleles that were maintained through positive selection. While the role of single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in adaptive introgression has been studied, the role of TRs remains largely unexplored. Scientists studying the mucin gene MUC19 using SNPs identified an positively selected introgressed tract which contains a highly expanded TR allele, highlighting the potential in this research. To date, MUC19 represents one example, but no genome-wide study has examined TRs within introgressed tracts. Recent advances in long-read sequencing and introgression mapping enable the investigation of TRs within introgressed regions and offer new insights into how they may jointly shape human adaptation. Our goal is to investigate the broad role of TRs across the genome in adaptive archaic introgression. Using 1000 Genomes dataset (1KG), we constructed a per-individual-haploid table of TR loci and introgressed tracts across 663 individuals. We used the LongTR tool to genotype TRs. We used the hmmix tool to identify specific genomic tracts of archaic origin within the same 1KG individuals. These datasets were merged to determine, for each haplotype, which TRs overlapped introgressed tracts. Our analysis investigated patterns of divergence in TRs and their relation to archaic introgression. These results could implicate TRs as a source of importance in exploring functional variation in evolution.

## Project Structure:
* **/data** : contains metadata of information about individuals included in this study (from 1000KG).
* **/notebooks** : contains jupyter notebooks for analysis of individuals.
* **/scripts** : contains bash and C scripts used in Talapas to perform analysis on genomes of individuals in the study.
   * /archive : contains scripts created while testing packages that are not used in the final studies
   * /processing_data : contains codes created to process raw genomoic data
